Journal of Business Logistics, 2013, 34(2): 77–84
© Council of Supply Chain Management Professionals

Data Science, Predictive Analytics, and Big Data: A Revolution
That Will Transform Supply Chain Design and Management
Matthew A. Waller1 and Stanley E. Fawcett2

University of Arkansas
Weber State University



We illuminate the myriad of opportunities for research where supply chain management (SCM) intersects with data science, predictive analytics, and big data, collectively referred to as DPB. We show that these terms are not only becoming popular but are also relevant to
supply chain research and education. Data science requires both domain knowledge and a broad set of quantitative skills, but there is a dearth
of literature on the topic and many questions. We call for research on skills that are needed by SCM data scientists and discuss how such skills
and domain knowledge affect the effectiveness of an SCM data scientist. Such knowledge is crucial to develop future supply chain leaders. We
propose deﬁnitions of data science and predictive analytics as applied to SCM. We examine possible applications of DPB in practice and provide examples of research questions from these applications, as well as examples of research questions employing DPB that stem from management theories. Finally, we propose speciﬁc steps interested researchers can take to respond to our call for research on the intersection of SCM
and DPB.
Keywords: data science; predictive analytics; big data; logistics; supply chain management; design; collaboration; integration; education

INTRODUCTION
“Big data” is the buzzword of the day. However, more than the
typical faddish fuzz, big data carries with it the opportunity to
change business model design and day-to-day decision making
that accompany emerging data analysis. This growing combination of resources, tools, and applications has deep implications in
the ﬁeld of supply chain management (SCM), presenting a doozy
of an opportunity and a challenge to our ﬁeld. Indeed, more data
have been recorded in the past two years than in all of previous
human history.1 Big data are being used to transform medical
practice, modernize public policy, and inform business decision
making (Mayer-Sch€onberger and Cukier 2013). Big data have
the potential to revolutionize supply chain dynamics.
The growth in the quantity and diversity of data has led to
data sets larger than is manageable by the conventional, handson management tools. To manage these new and potentially
invaluable data sets, new methods of data science and new applications in the form of predictive analytics, have been developed.
We will refer to this new conﬂuence of data science, predictive
analytics, and big data as DPB.
Data are widely considered to be a driver of better decision
making and improved proﬁtability, and this perception has some
data to back it up. Based on their large-scale study, McAfee and
Brynjolfsson (2012) note, “[t]he more companies characterized
themselves as data-driven, the better they performed on objective
measures of ﬁnancial and operational results … companies in the

Corresponding author:
Matthew A. Waller, Sam M. Walton College of Business, WCOB
308, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, AR 72701-1201, USA;
E-mail: MWaller@walton.uark.edu
1

Source: IBM, http://www-01.ibm.com/software/data/bigdata/
accessed March 27, 2013.

top third of their industry in the use of data-driven decision making were on average, 5% more productive and 6% more proﬁtable than their competitors” (p. 64). To make the most of the
big-data revolution, supply chain researchers and managers need
to understand and embrace DPB’s role and implications for supply chain decision making.

DATA SCIENCE, PREDICTIVE ANALYTICS, AND BIG
DATA
There is growing popular, business, and academic attention to
DPB. For instance, the October 2012 issue of Harvard Business
Review contained three articles that are relevant to this editorial:
“Big Data: The Management Revolution” (McAfee and Brynjolfsson 2012), “Data Scientist: The Sexiest Job of the 21st
Century” (Davenport and Patil 2012), and “Making Advanced
Analytics Work for You” (Barton and Court 2012). MIS Quarterly had a special issue on business intelligence and the lead
article was titled, “Business Intelligence and Analytics: From Big
Data to Big Impact” (Chen et al. 2012). There is also a plethora
of articles in trade and even lay publications on these topics.
There is even a new journal, Big Data, which premiered in
March 2013.
Over the past few years, we have been trying to understand
the DPB’s implications for research and education in business
logistics and SCM. We believe that these new tools will transform the way supply chain are designed and managed, presenting
a new and signiﬁcant challenge to logistics and SCM. Meeting
this challenge may require changes in foci of research and education. Many traditional approaches will need to be re-imagined.
Some standard practices may even be discarded as obsolete in
the new data-rich environment. Some may see the possibilities as
threats rather than opportunities. Yet DPB and SCM are fundamentally compatible, thus the tremendous value of DPB lies
within our grasp.

M. A. Waller and S. E. Fawcett

Figure 1: Effectiveness, domain knowledge, and breadth of analytical skill set.
Broad Set of
Analy cal Skills
Eﬀec veness of
Data Scien st

We want to encourage submission of research on topics
related to DPB that is relevant to logistics and SCM. Importantly, because there is a lack of agreement regarding the meanings of these terms, and because there is a dearth of articles on
how these terms apply to the logistics and supply chain disciplines, we would like to facilitate the process by suggesting deﬁnitions, concepts, and avenues for research.
Data science: Powerful tools made relevant by domain
knowledge

Narrow Set of
Analy cal Skills

Domain Knowledge

Generally, data science is the application of quantitative and
qualitative methods to solve relevant problems and predict outcomes. One of the salient revelations of today, with the vast and
growing amount of data, is that domain knowledge and analysis
cannot be separated. This is another motivation to write this editorial. Research in the area of DPB is needed by researchers with
domain knowledge in logistics and SCM. Professor Jeff Stanton
of Syracuse University was quoted by Dumbill et al. (2013):
From a teaching perspective, as a faculty member I can
teach someone how to do a t-test in 10 min, and I can
teach them how to write a Python program in half an
hour, but what I cannot teach them very easily is the
domain knowledge. In other words, in a given area, if you
are from healthcare, what you need to know in order to
be effective at analysis is very different than if you are in
retail. That underlying domain knowledge, to be able to
have a student come up to speed on that is very hard. (p.
22)
Likewise, Shelly Farnham of Microsoft was quoted by Dumbill et al. (2013):
One of the challenges is that data science is not agnostic
of domain. For example, when we are looking for people,
interns or full-time people on our team, we deﬁnitely look
for people who have experience analyzing data, but they
also should be deeply engaged with the topic … I think
that the domain knowledge is a very important aspect of
what we are looking for. (p. 25)
Thus, academic and applied professionals must have both the
analytical skills and the business and management understanding.
As Provost and Fawcett (2013) write, “But data science involves
much more than just data-mining algorithms. Successful data scientists must be able to view business problems from a data perspective” (p. 52).
Data scientists need deep domain knowledge and a broad set
of analytical skills. Developing a broad set of analytical skills
requires consistent investments of time. Developing deep domain
knowledge requires similar dedication of effort. To that end, typically there is no single individual that can possibly have all of
what is needed by a data scientist. If you have someone with lots
of domain experience but limited analytical capabilities, it may
be difﬁcult to acquire the analytical capabilities. On the other
hand, someone with strong analytical capabilities may not be
willing to learn the domain or may never have the opportunity to
learn the domain. Perhaps, developing analytical capabilities may

be easier at a younger age, whereas learning the intricacies of a
domain may depend on accumulated experience, which emerges
from motivation and well-invested time.
Although we do not have a strong body of evidence, our conjecture is that domain knowledge is necessary for data science
but that the returns on domain knowledge are diminishing and
that the relationship is moderated by the breadth of the analytical
skills. Figure 1 illustrates the conceptual relationship between
effectiveness, domain knowledge, and breadth of analytical skill
set. The effectiveness of a data scientist might be measured by
the size of the actionable opportunities they discover.
However, some analytical skills are more important than others. Table 1 provides examples of skills that are needed by a
data scientist in SCM. What is interesting is that education in
most of these disciplines progresses toward more focus and less
breadth. This is not only true of the quantitative disciplines, but
it is also true of the functional business disciplines. Training a
data scientist would require a functional business discipline to
inculcate toward more breadth, rather than more depth, as a student progresses in his/her educational path. This would be true
for the training of both the practitioner and the researcher. Perhaps there should be two paths for Master and PhD degrees in
SCM, one for domain knowledge creation and dissemination and
one for SCM data science.2
You will probably notice the applied nature of the skills
needed by an SCM data scientist in Table 1. However, this does
not mean that a strong theoretical education is not needed in
SCM. In fact, a strong theoretical knowledge is crucial, within
the area of SCM. That is, an SCM data scientist needs a strong
theoretical background in SCM along with an ability to apply
analysis techniques from a broad variety of quantitative disciplines as well as business disciplines. You will notice that the
ﬁrst six disciplines in Table 1 are quantitative disciplines and the
next four are business disciplines. Because data science is
applied, tools are needed for application. It is notable that SCM
is missing from the list. It is missing from the list because the
SCM data scientist must understand both the theory and application of SCM. This is the domain, and the other disciplines are
used for application of data to the SCM domain.

2

It is tempting to think that this is the difference between marketing and marketing science, however, most PhDs in marketing
science tend to have a very strong focus on one methodological
area.

21581592, 2013, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbl.12010 by Lock Haven University, Wiley Online Library on [25/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

78

79

Table 1: Examples of skills needed by a supply chain management (SCM) data scientist
SCM data scientist skill set
Discipline

More important

Less important

Statistics

Broad awareness of many different methods
of estimation and sampling
Understanding application of qualitative and
quantitative methods of forecasting
Numerical methods of optimization
Quick design and implementation of discrete
event simulation models
Using probability theory with actual data to
estimate the expected value of random variables of interest
Using numerical methods to estimate functions
relating independent variables to dependent variables
Capital budgeting
Determining opportunity cost
Marketing science
Managerial accounting

Derivations of methods and proofs
of maximum likelihood estimation
Understanding of underlying stochastic
processes
Finding global optimal solutions
Queuing theory

Forecasting
Optimization
Discrete event
simulation
Applied probability
Analytical mathematical
modeling
Finance
Economics
Marketing
Accounting

We now propose a deﬁnition of SCM data science: SCM data
science is the application of quantitative and qualitative methods
from a variety of disciplines in combination with SCM theory to
solve relevant SCM problems and predict outcomes, taking into
account data quality and availability issues. We welcome
research on this topic and would be pleased to publish it in the
Journal of Business Logistics. Practitioners are looking for
answers, and as researchers we should be proposing solutions,
frameworks, and answers, all based on theoretically grounded
research. We need theoretically based research to verify or reject
the ideas in Table 1 and to expand them. At this point, Table 1
is simply conjecture. We invite research that would address
which skill sets are needed by SCM data scientists.
Some may object to our claim that SCM theory is needed by
the SCM data scientist. However, theory is particularly important
now that data and data variety are proliferating. Theory is particularly important for preventing false positives.3 False positives
emerge when relationships between variables are discovered that
do not really exist. The problem is that as the number of variables increases—that is, as the use of a theoretical data mining
proliferates—the chances of false positives increases exponentially. In Figure 2, the horizontal axis is the number of variables
and the vertical axis is the number of false positives when the
probability of a given false positive is 0.01. Theory can help the
research or manager avoid spurious decision making as they
avoid falling prey to “apparent” relationships that do not really
exist. As Barton and Court (2012) observe, “We have found that
… hypothesis-led modeling generates faster outcomes and also
roots models in practical data relationships that are more broadly
understood by managers” (p. 81).
Big data, which will be discussed below, is the source of the
explosion of new variables that can be investigated, and therefore
3

For a very interesting discussion on this topic, see Carraway
(2012).

The theory of stochastic processes
Proving theorems
Efﬁcient market theory
Macroeconomic theory
Semiotics
Debits and credits journal entries

the reason why we expect the number of false positives to grow
exponentially. Using the appropriate logic and/or theory to build
models prior to running predictive analytics is a key approach to
mitigating the problems associated with false positives. So,
again, although SCM data science is applied, it must be based
on theory to guard against a proliferation of false positives,
which result in wasted time and money. Again, Barton and Court
(2012) comment that a “pure data mining approach often leads
to an endless search for what the data really say” (p. 81).
Predictive analytics
Predictive analytics is a subset of data science. Recognition of
the uniqueness of predictive analytics illuminates some
interesting needs in research as is illustrated by Table 2.
Figure 2: Relationship between number of variables and number of false positives when the probability of a given false positive is 0.01.

21581592, 2013, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbl.12010 by Lock Haven University, Wiley Online Library on [25/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Data Science & Big Data

M. A. Waller and S. E. Fawcett

Table 2 examines a sample of disciplines related to predictive
analytics, selects a dimension of that discipline, and compares
possible research topics and provides an example of a research
area that would be more relevant to predictive analytics and an
example of a research area that would be less relevant. Table 2
indirectly points to the distinction between predictive analytics
and each of these quantitative disciplines. It also provides
researchers with possible avenues of research that would be in
the realm of predictive analytics.
Importantly, although predictive analytics is related to many
long-standing quantitative approaches, it stands as distinct from
each. Statistics is quantitative, whereas predictive analytics is
both quantitative and qualitative. Forecasting is about predicting
the future, and predictive analytics adds questions regarding what
would have happened in the past, given different conditions.
Optimization is about ﬁnding the minimum or maximum of a
function, subject to constraints, whereas predictive analytics also
concerns what would characterize a system that was not operating optimally. Analytical modeling is primarily about generating
mathematical axioms and then proving lemmas and theorems,
whereas predictive analytics attempts to quickly and inexpensively approximate relationships between variables while still
using deductive mathematical methods to draw conclusions.

Use of polyhedral functions
in linear programming

Random number generation
for discrete event simulation

These are some examples of the differences in emphasis between
predictive analytics and well known quantitative disciplines.
The topics in Table 2 have been examined in part, but additional research in these relevant areas would advance predictive
analytics’ ability to reﬁne and improve supply chain decision
making. Indeed, the Journal of Business Logistics is interested in
predictive analytics research that is relevant to logistics and
SCM. To that end, we propose deﬁnitions of logistics and supply
chain predictive analytics:
Logistics predictive analytics use both quantitative and
qualitative methods to estimate the past and future behavior of the ﬂow and storage of inventory, as well as the
associated costs and service levels.
SCM predictive analytics use both quantitative and qualitative methods to improve supply chain design and competitiveness by estimating past and future levels of
integration of business processes among functions or companies, as well as the associated costs and service levels.
What is deﬁned here as logistics predictive analytics and SCM
predictive analytics has already existed in the past, it just lacked a

21581592, 2013, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbl.12010 by Lock Haven University, Wiley Online Library on [25/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

More detail around the sale,
including price, quantity,
items sold, time of day, date,
and customer data
More detail regarding decision and
purchasing behavior, including items
browsed and bought, frequency,
dollar value, and timing

From monthly and weekly
to daily and hourly

Direct sales, sales of distributors,
Internet sales, international sales,
and competitor sales

From click through
to card usage

Perpetual inventory at more locations,
at a more disaggregate level
(e.g., style/color/size)
Sensor data to detect location in store,
including misplaced inventory,
in distribution center
(picking, racks, staging, etc.),
in transportation unit

From monthly updates
to hourly updates

Face proﬁling data for shopper
identiﬁcation and emotion detection;
eye-tracking data; customer
sentiment about products purchased
based on “Likes,” “Tweets,” and
product reviews
Inventory in warehouses, stores,
Internet stores, and a wide variety
of vendors online
Not only where it is, but what is
close to it, who moved it, its path
to get there, and its predicted path
forward; location positions that are
time stamped from mobile devices

name. The idea is becoming so common that a name helps with
communication about the concept. Reading Table 2 with these definitions in mind should provide a guide to appropriate research on
logistics or SCM predictive analytics that would be of particular
interest at the Journal of Business Logistics. Barton and Court
(2012) highlight the growing value of advanced analytics:
“Advanced analytics is likely to become a decisive competitive asset in many industries and a core element in companies’ efforts to improve performance. It’s a mistake to
assume that acquiring the right kind of big data is all that
matters. Also essential is developing analytics tools that
focus on business outcomes … . (p. 81)

Big data
Big data is unique because of the volume, variety, and velocity
of the data, which today is widely available and much less
expensive to access and store (McAfee and Brynjolfsson 2012).
Volume can occur in many ways. There are more data because,
among other reasons, the data are captured in more detail. For
instance, instead of just recording that a unit sold at a particular
location, the time it was sold and the amount of inventory at the
time of the sale, is also captured. As another example, many
companies that did not record daily sales by location and by
stock-keeping unit to make inventory decisions, now do. Moreover, long global supply chains necessitate data capture at multiple points in the supply chain. In addition, there is now a
proliferation of consumer sentiment data resulting from Tweets,
Likes, and product reviews on websites. Such data must be analyzed and quantiﬁed. Software companies that provide algorithms
designed to assess text from reviews and Tweets are cropping up

Frequent updates for new
location and movement

Variety

in large numbers. Table 3 provides examples of some of the
causes of big data.
Table 4 provides examples of potential applications of big
data within logistics and SCM practice. Each column of Table 4
represents a key managerial component of business logistics and
each row represents a different category of user of logistics. This
is not intended to be an exhaustive list of components of logistics nor of users of logistics.
Table 5 provides examples of research questions based upon
management areas within logistics and SCM with reference to
various sources of big data.
Back to basics
Finally, using management theory as a lens, we provide a few
examples of research questions that are relevant to SCM in Table
6.
Demand for DPB professionals
We believe that there is increasing demand for professionals with
competencies in DPB. As an example of overall interest, we show
ﬁgures of the increasing numbers of Google searches for these
terms. Figure 3 show a graph of numbers of Google searches4
since 2004 for various relevant terms. The scales on the y-axes
are relative with 100 representing the peak number of searches.
As shown in Figure 3A, there were virtually no searches for
“Data Science” until 2005 and none for “Data Scientist” until
2011. We believe the terms are catching on because of the
4


How can sales data
be used with detailed
customer data to
improve inventory
management either
in terms of forecasting
or treating some inventory
as “committed” based
on speciﬁc shoppers requirements?
How can face proﬁling
data for shopper identiﬁcation,
emotion detection, and eye-tracking
data be used to determine
which items to carry
and stock at particular
shelf locations?
How can sensor data
used to detect location
in store, be used to
improve inventory management,
including departmental
merchandising decisions?

How can more current
sales data be used to
re-direct shipments in
transit? How can sales
data, integrated with
detailed customer data,
be used for more
efﬁcient and effective
merge-in-transit operations?
How can delivery
preferences captured in
online purchases
be used to manage
transportation mode
and carrier selection decisions?

How can more granular sales "
data from the wide variety
of sources that exist be
used to improve visibility
on the one hand and
trust on the other,
between trading partners?

How can sensor data
in the distribution
center be used to
anticipate transportation
requirements?

How can location and time-stamp
data of shoppers be used for
collaborative assortment and
merchandising decisions?

increased need for people with skill sets that can deal with big
data. Figure 3B shows a graph of searches5 for “Predictive Analytics.” Like “Data Science,” searches for “Predictive Analytics”
essentially began in 2005 with signiﬁcant growth after 2009. Fighttp://www.google.com/trends/explore#q=%22predictive%
20analytics%22&cmpt=q (referenced March 22, 2013).

How can customer sentiment
about products purchased
based on “Likes,”
“Tweets,” and product reviews
be used to collaborate on forecasts?

ure 3C shows a graph of searches6 for “Big Data,” with “Supply
Chain Management” as a reference. As you can see, this is the
ﬁrst year “Big Data” had more searches than “Supply Chain


Transaction
How does the existence of big data affect the reduction in internal transaction costs vis-a-vis external
cost economics
transaction costs and how is this affecting the size of logistics organizations and the structure of supply chains?
Resource-based view Can SCM data science be developed as a resource that is valuable, rare, in imitable, and nonsubstitutable?
Contingency theory How can big data and SCM data science be used by logistics managers to meet internal needs and adjust to
changes in the supply chain environment?
Resource
How does the ability to use big data for SCM decisions affect a ﬁrm’s power in comparison with its suppliers
dependence theory
or customers?
Agency theory
How does the proliferation of big data affect the agency costs associated with the use of third party logistics?
Institutional theory
How do differences in freedom of information between countries affect ﬁrms operating under these different
institutions in terms of their abilities to leverage big data in the supply chain?

Figure 3: Google searches for growth of interest in DPB professionals.
Panel A: Google Searches for “Data Science” and “Data Scien st” since 2004

Panel B: Google Searches for “Predic ve Analy cs” since 2004

Panel C: Google Searches for “Big Data” and “Supply Chain Management” since 2004

Management.” We do not think big data will become more
important than SCM; it is shown here just to illustrate how
popular the phrase is becoming.

Clearly, Figure 3 shows that interest in DPB is growing
exponentially. We believe that the phenomena underlying this
trend create a number of challenges and opportunities for our

21581592, 2013, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbl.12010 by Lock Haven University, Wiley Online Library on [25/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Data Science & Big Data

discipline. We have only begun to explore the possibilities, and
we need to more creatively ask informed decisions about how
big data can improve supply chain design, relationship development, improve customer service systems, and manage day-to-day
value-added operations.

M. A. Waller and S. E. Fawcett

pline in a way that is both rigorous and relevant. Indeed, we
believe it is a real doozy for knowledge creation and dissemination in SCM.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
CONCLUDING DISCUSSION
Although “Big data” has become a contemporary buzzword, it has
signiﬁcant implications in our discipline, and presents an opportunity and a challenge to our approach of research and teaching. We
can easily see how data science and predictive analytics apply to
SCM, but sometimes ﬁnd it more difﬁcult to see the direct connection of big data to SCM. Therefore, we would like to see research
published in the Journal of Business Logistics that brings clarity to
the relevance of big data, and DPB in general within the supply
chain domain. Here is how you can participate:
1. Submit manuscripts dealing with DPB.
2. Submit Forward Thinking articles on DPB.
3. Send us a proposal for a Special Topics Forum on DPB.
4. Design a Thought Leader Series on DPB.
5. Start a new research project on DPB, using your existing
research skills and domain knowledge.
6. If you have ideas about how we can promote research on
DPB outside of these categories, please email us and let us
know your thoughts.
This edition of the Journal of Business Logistics, Volume
34, Issue 2, represents the mid-point of our ﬁve-year commitment as co-editors-in-chief. We have been diligent in this commitment to serve not only as stewards and administrators of
the journal but also to span boundaries to provide leadership
and direction for research in our discipline. We believe the
intersections of our discipline with data science, predictive analytics, and big data will create signiﬁcant challenges for educating future supply chain leaders. Yet, they also provide
opportunities for research to advance knowledge in our disci-

We thank the following individuals for their helpful comments,
edits, and input on earlier drafts of this manuscript: Yao (Henry)
Jin, John Saldana, Travis Tokar, Christopher Vincent, Xiang
Wan, and Brent Williams. Their input resulted in a signiﬁcant
improvement to the manuscript.
