Data Science, Predictive Analytics, and Big Data: A Revolution
That Will Transform Supply Chain Design and Management
Matthew A. Waller1and Stanley E. Fawcett2
1University of Arkansas
2Weber State University
We illuminate the myriad of opportunities for research where supply chain management (SCM) intersects with data science, predictive ana-
lytics, and big data, collectively referred to as DPB. We show that these terms are not only becoming popular but are also relevant to
supply chain research and education. Data science requires both domain knowledge and a broad set of quantitative skills, but there is a dearth
of literature on the topic and many questions. We call for research on skills that are needed by SCM data scientists and discuss how such skills
and domain knowledge affect the effectiveness of an SCM data scientist. Such knowledge is crucial to develop future supply chain leaders. We
propose de ﬁnitions of data science and predictive analytics as applied to SCM. We examine possible applications of DPB in practice and pro-
vide examples of research questions from these applications, as well as examples of research questions employing DPB that stem from manage-
ment theories. Finally, we propose speci ﬁc steps interested researchers can take to respond to our call for research on the intersection of SCM
and DPB.
Keywords : data science; predictive analytics; big data; logistics; supply chain management; design; collaboration; integration; education
INTRODUCTION
“Big data ”is the buzzword of the day. However, more than the
typical faddish fuzz, big data carries with it the opportunity to
change business model design and day-to-day decision making
that accompany emerging data analysis. This growing combina-
tion of resources, tools, and applications has deep implications in
theﬁeld of supply chain management (SCM), presenting a doozy
of an opportunity and a challenge to our ﬁeld. Indeed, more data
have been recorded in the past two years than in all of previous
human history.1Big data are being used to transform medical
practice, modernize public policy, and inform business decision
making (Mayer-Sch €onberger and Cukier 2013). Big data have
the potential to revolutionize supply chain dynamics.
The growth in the quantity and diversity of data has led to
data sets larger than is manageable by the conventional, hands-
on management tools. To manage these new and potentially
invaluable data sets, new methods of data science and new appli-
cations in the form of predictive analytics, have been developed.
We will refer to this new con ﬂuence of data science, predictive
analytics, and big data as DPB.
Data are widely considered to be a driver of better decision
making and improved pro ﬁtability, and this perception has some
data to back it up. Based on their large-scale study, McAfee and
Brynjolfsson (2012) note, “[t]he more companies characterized
themselves as data-driven, the better they performed on objective
measures of ﬁnancial and operational results …companies in thetop third of their industry in the use of data-driven decision mak-
ing were on average, 5% more productive and 6% more pro ﬁt-
able than their competitors ”(p. 64). To make the most of the
big-data revolution, supply chain researchers and managers need
to understand and embrace DPB ’s role and implications for sup-
ply chain decision making.
DATA SCIENCE, PREDICTIVE ANALYTICS, AND BIG
DATA
There is growing popular, business, and academic attention to
DPB. For instance, the October 2012 issue of Harvard Business
Review contained three articles that are relevant to this editorial:
“Big Data: The Management Revolution ”(McAfee and Bry-
njolfsson 2012), “Data Scientist: The Sexiest Job of the 21st
Century ”(Davenport and Patil 2012), and “Making Advanced
Analytics Work for You ”(Barton and Court 2012). MIS Quar-
terly had a special issue on business intelligence and the lead
article was titled, “Business Intelligence and Analytics: From Big
Data to Big Impact ”(Chen et al. 2012). There is also a plethora
of articles in trade and even lay publications on these topics.
There is even a new journal, Big Data , which premiered in
March 2013.
Over the past few years, we have been trying to understand
the DPB ’s implications for research and education in business
logistics and SCM. We believe that these new tools will trans-
form the way supply chain are designed and managed, presenting
a new and signi ﬁcant challenge to logistics and SCM. Meeting
this challenge may require changes in foci of research and educa-
tion. Many traditional approaches will need to be re-imagined.
Some standard practices may even be discarded as obsolete in
the new data-rich environment. Some may see the possibilities as
threats rather than opportunities. Yet DPB and SCM are funda-
mentally compatible, thus the tremendous value of DPB lies
within our grasp.Corresponding author:
Matthew A. Waller, Sam M. Walton College of Business, WCOB
308, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, AR 72701-1201, USA;
E-mail: MWaller@walton.uark.edu
1Source: IBM, http://www-01.ibm.com/software/data/bigdata/
accessed March 27, 2013.Journal of Business Logistics , 2013, 34(2): 77 –84
© Council of Supply Chain Management Professionals
We want to encourage submission of research on topics
related to DPB that is relevant to logistics and SCM. Impor-
tantly, because there is a lack of agreement regarding the mean-ings of these terms, and because there is a dearth of articles onhow these terms apply to the logistics and supply chain disci-plines, we would like to facilitate the process by suggesting de ﬁ-
nitions, concepts, and avenues for research.
Data science: Powerful tools made relevant by domain
knowledge
Generally, data science is the application of quantitative and
qualitative methods to solve relevant problems and predict out-comes. One of the salient revelations of today, with the vast and
growing amount of data, is that domain knowledge and analysis
cannot be separated. This is another motivation to write this edi-torial. Research in the area of DPB is needed by researchers withdomain knowledge in logistics and SCM. Professor Jeff Stantonof Syracuse University was quoted by Dumbill et al. (2013):
From a teaching perspective, as a faculty member I can
teach someone how to do a t-test in 10 min, and I can
teach them how to write a Python program in half anhour, but what I cannot teach them very easily is thedomain knowledge. In other words, in a given area, if youare from healthcare, what you need to know in order tobe effective at analysis is very different than if you are in
retail. That underlying domain knowledge, to be able to
have a student come up to speed on that is very hard. (p.22)
Likewise, Shelly Farnham of Microsoft was quoted by Dum-
bill et al. (2013):
One of the challenges is that data science is not agnostic
of domain. For example, when we are looking for people,interns or full-time people on our team, we de ﬁnitely look
for people who have experience analyzing data, but theyalso should be deeply engaged with the topic …I think
that the domain knowledge is a very important aspect of
what we are looking for. (p. 25)
Thus, academic and applied professionals must have both the
analytical skills and the business and management understanding.As Provost and Fawcett (2013) write, “But data science involves
much more than just data-mining algorithms. Successful data sci-entists must be able to view business problems from a data per-spective ”(p. 52).
Data scientists need deep domain knowledge and a broad set
of analytical skills. Developing a broad set of analytical skillsrequires consistent investments of time. Developing deep domainknowledge requires similar dedication of effort. To that end, typ-
ically there is no single individual that can possibly have all of
what is needed by a data scientist. If you have someone with lotsof domain experience but limited analytical capabilities, it maybe dif ﬁcult to acquire the analytical capabilities. On the other
hand, someone with strong analytical capabilities may not bewilling to learn the domain or may never have the opportunity tolearn the domain. Perhaps, developing analytical capabilities maybe easier at a younger age, whereas learning the intricacies of a
domain may depend on accumulated experience, which emergesfrom motivation and well-invested time.
Although we do not have a strong body of evidence, our con-
jecture is that domain knowledge is necessary for data science
but that the returns on domain knowledge are diminishing andthat the relationship is moderated by the breadth of the analyticalskills. Figure 1 illustrates the conceptual relationship betweeneffectiveness, domain knowledge, and breadth of analytical skillset. The effectiveness of a data scientist might be measured bythe size of the actionable opportunities they discover.
However, some analytical skills are more important than oth-
ers. Table 1 provides examples of skills that are needed by adata scientist in SCM. What is interesting is that education inmost of these disciplines progresses toward more focus and less
breadth. This is not only true of the quantitative disciplines, but
it is also true of the functional business disciplines. Training adata scientist would require a functional business discipline toinculcate toward more breadth, rather than more depth, as a stu-dent progresses in his/her educational path. This would be truefor the training of both the practitioner and the researcher. Per-haps there should be two paths for Master and PhD degrees inSCM, one for domain knowledge creation and dissemination andone for SCM data science.
2
You will probably notice the applied nature of the skills
needed by an SCM data scientist in Table 1. However, this does
not mean that a strong theoretical education is not needed in
SCM. In fact, a strong theoretical knowledge is crucial, within
the area of SCM . That is, an SCM data scientist needs a strong
theoretical background in SCM along with an ability to applyanalysis techniques from a broad variety of quantitative disci-plines as well as business disciplines. You will notice that theﬁrst six disciplines in Table 1 are quantitative disciplines and the
next four are business disciplines. Because data science isapplied, tools are needed for application. It is notable that SCMis missing from the list. It is missing from the list because theSCM data scientist must understand both the theory and applica-
tion of SCM. This is the domain, and the other disciplines are
used for application of data to the SCM domain.Broad Set of
Narrow Set ofAnalyƟcal SkillsEﬀecƟveness of
Data Scien Ɵst
AnalyƟcal Skills
Domain KnowledgeFigure 1: Effectiveness, domain knowledge, and breadth of ana-
lytical skill set.
2It is tempting to think that this is the difference between mar-
keting and marketing science, however, most PhDs in marketing
science tend to have a very strong focus on one methodological
area.78 M. A. Waller and S. E. Fawcett
 21581592, 2013, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbl.12010 by Lock Haven University, Wiley Online Library on [25/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
We now propose a de ﬁnition of SCM data science: SCM data
science is the application of quantitative and qualitative methodsfrom a variety of disciplines in combination with SCM theory tosolve relevant SCM problems and predict outcomes, taking intoaccount data quality and availability issues. We welcome
research on this topic and would be pleased to publish it in theJournal of Business Logistics . Practitioners are looking for
answers, and as researchers we should be proposing solutions,frameworks, and answers, all based on theoretically groundedresearch. We need theoretically based research to verify or rejectthe ideas in Table 1 and to expand them. At this point, Table 1
is simply conjecture. We invite research that would address
which skill sets are needed by SCM data scientists.
Some may object to our claim that SCM theory is needed by
the SCM data scientist. However, theory is particularly importantnow that data and data variety are proliferating. Theory is partic-ularly important for preventing false positives.
3False positives
emerge when relationships between variables are discovered thatdo not really exist. The problem is that as the number of vari-ables increases —that is, as the use of a theoretical data mining
proliferates —the chances of false positives increases exponen-
tially. In Figure 2, the horizontal axis is the number of variables
and the vertical axis is the number of false positives when the
probability of a given false positive is 0.01. Theory can help theresearch or manager avoid spurious decision making as theyavoid falling prey to “apparent ”relationships that do not really
exist. As Barton and Court (2012) observe, “We have found that
…hypothesis-led modeling generates faster outcomes and also
roots models in practical data relationships that are more broadlyunderstood by managers ”(p. 81).
Big data, which will be discussed below, is the source of the
explosion of new variables that can be investigated, and thereforethe reason why we expect the number of false positives to grow
exponentially. Using the appropriate logic and/or theory to build
models prior to running predictive analytics is a key approach tomitigating the problems associated with false positives. So,again, although SCM data science is applied, it must be basedon theory to guard against a proliferation of false positives,which result in wasted time and money. Again, Barton and Court(2012) comment that a “pure data mining approach often leads
to an endless search for what the data really say ”(p. 81).
Predictive analytics
Predictive analytics is a subset of data science. Recognition of
the uniqueness of predictive analytics illuminates some
interesting needs in research as is illustrated by Table 2.Table 1: Examples of skills needed by a supply chain management (SCM) data scientist
DisciplineSCM data scientist skill set
More important Less important
Statistics Broad awareness of many different methods
of estimation and samplingDerivations of methods and proofs
of maximum likelihood estimation
Forecasting Understanding application of qualitative and
quantitative methods of forecastingUnderstanding of underlying stochastic
processes
Optimization Numerical methods of optimization Finding global optimal solutionsDiscrete event
simulationQuick design and implementation of discrete
event simulation modelsQueuing theory
Applied probability Using probability theory with actual data to
estimate the expected value of random variables of interestThe theory of stochastic processes
Analytical mathematical
modelingUsing numerical methods to estimate functions
relating independent variables to dependent variablesProving theorems
Finance Capital budgeting Ef ﬁcient market theory
Economics Determining opportunity cost Macroeconomic theoryMarketing Marketing science Semiotics
Accounting Managerial accounting Debits and credits journal entries
Figure 2: Relationship between number of variables and num-
ber of false positives when the probability of a given false posi-tive is 0.01.
3For a very interesting discussion on this topic, see Carraway
(2012).Data Science & Big Data 79
 21581592, 2013, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbl.12010 by Lock Haven University, Wiley Online Library on [25/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Table 2 examines a sample of disciplines related to predictive
analytics, selects a dimension of that discipline, and comparespossible research topics and provides an example of a researcharea that would be more relevant to predictive analytics and anexample of a research area that would be less relevant. Table 2indirectly points to the distinction between predictive analyticsand each of these quantitative disciplines. It also providesresearchers with possible avenues of research that would be inthe realm of predictive analytics.
Importantly, although predictive analytics is related to many
long-standing quantitative approaches, it stands as distinct from
each. Statistics is quantitative, whereas predictive analytics isboth quantitative and qualitative. Forecasting is about predictingthe future, and predictive analytics adds questions regarding whatwould have happened in the past, given different conditions.Optimization is about ﬁnding the minimum or maximum of a
function, subject to constraints, whereas predictive analytics alsoconcerns what would characterize a system that was not operat-ing optimally. Analytical modeling is primarily about generatingmathematical axioms and then proving lemmas and theorems,whereas predictive analytics attempts to quickly and inexpen-
sively approximate relationships between variables while still
using deductive mathematical methods to draw conclusions.These are some examples of the differences in emphasis between
predictive analytics and well known quantitative disciplines.
The topics in Table 2 have been examined in part, but addi-
tional research in these relevant areas would advance predictiveanalytics ’ability to re ﬁne and improve supply chain decision
making. Indeed, the Journal of Business Logistics is interested in
predictive analytics research that is relevant to logistics andSCM. To that end, we propose de ﬁnitions of logistics and supply
chain predictive analytics:
Logistics predictive analytics use both quantitative and
qualitative methods to estimate the past and future behav-
ior of the ﬂow and storage of inventory, as well as the
associated costs and service levels.
SCM predictive analytics use both quantitative and quali-
tative methods to improve supply chain design and com-petitiveness by estimating past and future levels ofintegration of business processes among functions or com-panies, as well as the associated costs and service levels.
What is de ﬁned here as logistics predictive analytics and SCM
predictive analytics has already existed in the past, it just lacked aTable 2: Examples of research in predictive analytics
Comparative
disciplineDimension
of interestPredictive analytics research (examples)
Relevant Less relevant
Statistics Quantitative Integrating quantitative and
qualitative analysisImproving Lagrange Multiplier
tests for autocorrelation
Forecasting Predicting the future Using forecasting techniques
for evaluating what
would have happened underdifferent circumstancesDeriving generalized estimators
of seasonal factors
Optimization Minimization and
maximizationAssessment of the quality of
the optimal solution andthe ability to implement itversus near optimal solutionsUse of polyhedral functions
in linear programming
Discrete event
simulationQuantitative analysis
of a system in astochastic settingDiscrete event simulation in a
business process reengineering settingRandom number generation
for discrete event simulation
Applied probability Description of
stochastic variables,
expected values,and uncertaintyApplied probability along with
application anchoring and
framing affects from psychologyAsymptotic properties of
Gaussian processes
Data mining Search for patterns
and relationshipsbetween a largenumber of variableswith lots of dataData mining preceded by logical
and theoretical descriptionsof possible relationships and patternsGibbs posterior for variable
selection in data mining
Analytical
mathematicalmodelingPrecise analysis using
artiﬁcial and unrealistic
assumptions for
theorems and proofsMethods of quickly and
inexpensively modeling approximaterelationships between variables
while still using deductive
mathematical methodsProving inventory theorems that
assume known, continuous demandwith perfect information80 M. A. Waller and S. E. Fawcett
 21581592, 2013, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbl.12010 by Lock Haven University, Wiley Online Library on [25/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
name. The idea is becoming so common that a name helps with
communication about the concept. Reading Table 2 with these def-initions in mind should provide a guide to appropriate research onlogistics or SCM predictive analytics that would be of particularinterest at the Journal of Business Logistics . Barton and Court
(2012) highlight the growing value of advanced analytics:
“Advanced analytics is likely to become a decisive compet-
itive asset in many industries and a core element in com-panies ’efforts to improve performance. It ’s a mistake to
assume that acquiring the right kind of big data is all thatmatters. Also essential is developing analytics tools that
focus on business outcomes …. (p. 81)
Big data
Big data is unique because of the volume, variety, and velocity
of the data, which today is widely available and much lessexpensive to access and store (McAfee and Brynjolfsson 2012).Volume can occur in many ways. There are more data because,among other reasons, the data are captured in more detail. Forinstance, instead of just recording that a unit sold at a particularlocation, the time it was sold and the amount of inventory at thetime of the sale, is also captured. As another example, manycompanies that did not record daily sales by location and by
stock-keeping unit to make inventory decisions, now do. More-
over, long global supply chains necessitate data capture at multi-ple points in the supply chain. In addition, there is now aproliferation of consumer sentiment data resulting from Tweets,Likes, and product reviews on websites. Such data must be ana-lyzed and quanti ﬁed. Software companies that provide algorithms
designed to assess text from reviews and Tweets are cropping upin large numbers. Table 3 provides examples of some of the
causes of big data.
Table 4 provides examples of potential applications of big
data within logistics and SCM practice. Each column of Table 4represents a key managerial component of business logistics andeach row represents a different category of user of logistics. Thisis not intended to be an exhaustive list of components of logis-tics nor of users of logistics.
Table 5 provides examples of research questions based upon
management areas within logistics and SCM with reference tovarious sources of big data.
Back to basics
Finally, using management theory as a lens, we provide a few
examples of research questions that are relevant to SCM in Table6.
Demand for DPB professionals
We believe that there is increasing demand for professionals with
competencies in DPB. As an example of overall interest, we showﬁgures of the increasing numbers of Google searches for these
terms. Figure 3 show a graph of numbers of Google searches
4
since 2004 for various relevant terms. The scales on the y-axes
are relative with 100 representing the peak number of searches.
As shown in Figure 3A, there were virtually no searches for
“Data Science ”until 2005 and none for “Data Scientist ”until
2011. We believe the terms are catching on because of theTable 3: Examples of causes of big data
Type of data Volume Velocity Variety
Sales More detail around the sale,
including price, quantity,items sold, time of day, date,
and customer dataFrom monthly and weekly
to daily and hourlyDirect sales, sales of distributors,
Internet sales, international sales,and competitor sales
Consumer More detail regarding decision and
purchasing behavior, including itemsbrowsed and bought, frequency,dollar value, and timingFrom click through
to card usageFace pro ﬁling data for shopper
identi ﬁcation and emotion detection;
eye-tracking data; customersentiment about products purchasedbased on “Likes, ”“Tweets, ”and
product reviews
Inventory Perpetual inventory at more locations,
at a more disaggregate level(e.g., style/color/size)From monthly updates
to hourly updatesInventory in warehouses, stores,
Internet stores, and a wide varietyof vendors online
Location and time Sensor data to detect location in store,
including misplaced inventory,
in distribution center(picking, racks, staging, etc.),in transportation unitFrequent updates for new
location and movementNot only where it is, but what is
close to it, who moved it, its path
to get there, and its predicted pathforward; location positions that aretime stamped from mobile devices
4http://www.google.com/trends/explore#q=%22data%20science
%22%2C%20%22data%20scientist%22&cmpt=q (referenced March
22, 2013).Data Science & Big Data 81
 21581592, 2013, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbl.12010 by Lock Haven University, Wiley Online Library on [25/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
increased need for people with skill sets that can deal with big
data. Figure 3B shows a graph of searches5for“Predictive Ana-
lytics. ”Like “Data Science, ”searches for “Predictive Analytics ”
essentially began in 2005 with signi ﬁcant growth after 2009. Fig-ure 3C shows a graph of searches6for“Big Data, ”with “Supply
Chain Management ”as a reference. As you can see, this is the
ﬁrst year “Big Data ”had more searches than “Supply ChainTable 4: Examples of potential applications of big data in logistics
User ForecastingInventory
managementTransportation
managementHuman
resources
Carrier Time of delivery,
factoring in weather,
driver characteristics,
time of day and dateReal time capacity
availabilityOptimal routing,
taking into account
weather, traf ﬁc congestion,
and driver characteristicsReduction in
driver turnover,
driver assignment,
using sentimentdata analysis
Manufacturer Early response
to extremely negativeor positive customersentimentReduction in shrink,
efﬁcient consumer
response, quick response,and vendor managedinventoryImproved noti ﬁcation of
delivery time, andavailability; surveillance datafor improved yard managementMore effective
monitoring ofproductivity;medical sensorsfor safety of laborin factories
Retailer Customer sentiment
data and use of
mobile devices in storesImprovement in
perpetual inventory
system accuracyLinking local traf ﬁc
congestion and weather
to store traf ﬁcReduction in labor
due to reduction in
misplaced inventory
Table 5: Examples of research questions
Type of dataInventory
managementTransportation
managementCustomer and supplier
relationship management
Sales How can sales data
be used with detailed
customer data toimprove inventorymanagement eitherin terms of forecastingor treating some inventoryas“committed ”based
on speci ﬁc shoppers requirements?How can more current
sales data be used to
re-direct shipments intransit? How can salesdata, integrated withdetailed customer data,be used for moreefﬁcient and effective
merge-in-transit operations?How can more granular sales "
data from the wide variety
of sources that exist beused to improve visibilityon the one hand andtrust on the other,between trading partners?
Consumer How can face pro ﬁling
data for shopper identi ﬁcation,
emotion detection, and eye-tracking
data be used to determine
which items to carryand stock at particularshelf locations?How can delivery
preferences captured inonline purchases
be used to manage
transportation modeand carrier selection decisions?How can customer sentiment
about products purchasedbased on “Likes, ”
“Tweets, ”and product reviews
be used to collaborate on forecasts?
Location and time How can sensor data
used to detect locationin store, be used toimprove inventory management,including departmentalmerchandising decisions?How can sensor data
in the distributioncenter be used toanticipate transportationrequirements?How can location and time-stamp
data of shoppers be used forcollaborative assortment andmerchandising decisions?
5http://www.google.com/trends/explore#q=%22predictive%
20analytics%22&cmpt=q (referenced March 22, 2013).6http://www.google.com/trends/explore#q=%22big%20data%
22%2C%20%22supply%20chain%20management%22&cmpt=q
(referenced March 22, 2013).82 M. A. Waller and S. E. Fawcett
 21581592, 2013, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbl.12010 by Lock Haven University, Wiley Online Library on [25/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Management. ”We do not think big data will become more
important than SCM; it is shown here just to illustrate howpopular the phrase is becoming.Clearly, Figure 3 shows that interest in DPB is growing
exponentially. We believe that the phenomena underlying thistrend create a number of challenges and opportunities for ourTable 6: Examples of big data research questions that are relevant to supply chain management (SCM), stemming from management
theory
Theory Research question
Transaction
cost economicsHow does the existence of big data affect the reduction in internal transaction costs vis- /C18a-vis external
transaction costs and how is this affecting the size of logistics organizations and the structure of supply chains?
Resource-based view Can SCM data science be developed as a resource that is valuable, rare, in imitable, and nonsubstitutable?
Contingency theory How can big data and SCM data science be used by logistics managers to meet internal needs and adjust to
changes in the supply chain environment?
Resource
dependence theoryHow does the ability to use big data for SCM decisions affect a ﬁrm’s power in comparison with its suppliers
or customers?
Agency theory How does the proliferation of big data affect the agency costs associated with the use of third party logistics?Institutional theory How do differences in freedom of information between countries affect ﬁrms operating under these different
institutions in terms of their abilities to leverage big data in the supply chain?
Panel A: Google Searches for “Data Science” and “Data Scien Ɵst” since 2004
Panel B: Google Searches for “Predic Ɵve AnalyƟcs” since 2004
Panel C: Google Searches for “Big Data” and “Supply Chain Management” since 2004Figure 3: Google searches for growth of interest in DPB professionals.Data Science & Big Data 83
 21581592, 2013, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbl.12010 by Lock Haven University, Wiley Online Library on [25/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
discipline. We have only begun to explore the possibilities, and
we need to more creatively ask informed decisions about how
big data can improve supply chain design, relationship develop-ment, improve customer service systems, and manage day-to-dayvalue-added operations.
CONCLUDING DISCUSSION
Although “Big data ”has become a contemporary buzzword, it has
signiﬁcant implications in our discipline, and presents an opportu-
nity and a challenge to our approach of research and teaching. Wecan easily see how data science and predictive analytics apply toSCM, but sometimes ﬁnd it more dif ﬁcult to see the direct connec-
tion of big data to SCM. Therefore, we would like to see research
published in the Journal of Business Logistics that brings clarity to
the relevance of big data, and DPB in general within the supplychain domain. Here is how you can participate:
1. Submit manuscripts dealing with DPB.
2. Submit Forward Thinking articles on DPB.3. Send us a proposal for a Special Topics Forum on DPB.
4. Design a Thought Leader Series on DPB.
5. Start a new research project on DPB, using your existing
research skills and domain knowledge.
6. If you have ideas about how we can promote research on
DPB outside of these categories, please email us and let usknow your thoughts.
This edition of the Journal of Business Logistics , Volume
34, Issue 2, represents the mid-point of our ﬁve-year commit-
ment as co-editors-in-chief. We have been diligent in this com-mitment to serve not only as stewards and administrators ofthe journal but also to span boundaries to provide leadershipand direction for research in our discipline. We believe theintersections of our discipline with data science, predictive ana-lytics, and big data will create signi ﬁcant challenges for educat-
ing future supply chain leaders. Yet, they also provideopportunities for research to advance knowledge in our disci-pline in a way that is both rigorous and relevant. Indeed, we
believe it is a real doozy for knowledge creation and dissemi-
nation in SCM.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank the following individuals for their helpful comments,
edits, and input on earlier drafts of this manuscript: Yao (Henry)Jin, John Saldana, Travis Tokar, Christopher Vincent, XiangWan, and Brent Williams. Their input resulted in a signi ﬁcant
improvement to the manuscript.
REFERENCES
Barton, D., and Court, D. 2012. “Making Advanced Analytics
Work for You. ”Harvard Business Review 90:79–83.
Carraway, R. 2012. “Big Data, Small Bets. ”Forbes . http://www.
forbes.com/sites/darden/2012/12/13/big-data-small-bets/.
Chen, H., Chiang, R., and Storey, V. 2012. “Business
Intelligence and Analytics: From Big Data to Big Impact. ”
MIS Quarterly 36(4):1165 –88.
Davenport, T., and Patil, D. 2012. “Data Scientist: The Sexiest
Job of the 21st Century. ”Harvard Business Review 90:70–76.
Dumbill, E., Liddy, E., Stanton, J., Mueller, K., and Farnham, S.
2013. “Educating the Next Generation of Data Scientists. ”
Big Data 1(1):21–27.
Mayer-Sch €onberger, V., and Cukier, K. 2013. Big Data: A
Revolution That Will Transform How We Live, Work, andThink . New York: Houghton Mif ﬂin Harcourt Publishing
Company.
McAfee, A., and Brynjolfsson, E. 2012. “Big Data: The
Management Revolution. ”Harvard Business Review 90:60–
68.
Provost, F., and Fawcett, T. 2013. “Data Science and Its
Relationship to Big Data and Data-Driven Decision Making. ”
Big Data 1(1):51–59.84 M. A. Waller and S. E. Fawcett
 21581592, 2013, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jbl.12010 by Lock Haven University, Wiley Online Library on [25/03/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
