Abstract
Companies have realized they need to hire data scientists, academic institutions are scrambling to put together data-
science programs, and publications are touting data science as a hot—even ‘‘sexy’’—career choice. However, there isconfusion about what exactly data science is, and this confusion could lead to disillusionment as the concept diffusesinto meaningless buzz. In this article, we argue that there are good reasons why it has been hard to pin down exactly
what is data science. One reason is that data science is intricately intertwined with other important concepts also of
growing importance, such as big data and data-driven decision making. Another reason is the natural tendency toassociate what a practitioner does with the deﬁnition of the practitioner’s ﬁeld; this can result in overlooking thefundamentals of the ﬁeld. We believe that trying to deﬁne the boundaries of data science precisely is not of the utmostimportance. We can debate the boundaries of the ﬁeld in an academic setting, but in order for data science to servebusiness effectively, it is important (i) to understand its relationships to other important related concepts, and (ii) tobegin to identify the fundamental principles underlying data science. Once we embrace (ii), we can much betterunderstand and explain exactly what data science has to offer. Furthermore, only once we embrace (ii) should we becomfortable calling it data science . In this article, we present a perspective that addresses all these concepts. We close
by offering, as examples, a partial list of fundamental principles underlying data science.
Introduction
With vast amounts of data now available, companies in
almost every industry are focused on exploiting data for
competitive advantage. The volume and variety of data have
far outstripped the capacity of manual analysis, and in somecases have exceeded the capacity of conventional databases.At the same time, computers have become far more powerful,networking is ubiquitous, and algorithms have been devel-oped that can connect datasets to enable broader and deeperanalyses than previously possible. The convergence of thesephenomena has given rise to the increasingly widespreadbusiness application of data science.
Companies across industries have realized that they need to
hire more data scientists. Academic institutions are scram-bling to put together programs to train data scientists. Pub-lications are touting data science as a hot career choice andeven ‘‘sexy.’’
1However, there is confusion about what exactly
is data science, and this confusion could well lead to
1Leonard N. Stern School of Business, New York University, New York, New York.
2Data Scientists, LLC, New York, New York and Mountain View, California.
ªFoster Provost and Tom Fawcett 2013; Published by Mary Ann Liebert, Inc. This article is available under the Creative Commons License CC-BY-NC (http: //creativecommons.org/
licenses/by-nc/4.0). This license permits non-commercial use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properl y cited. Permission only needs to be
obtained for commercial use and can be done via RightsLink.
DATA SCIENCE
AND ITS
RELATIONSHIP
TO BIG DATA AND
DATA-DRIVEN
DECISION MAKING
Foster Provost1and Tom Fawcett2ORIGINAL ARTICLE
DOI: 10.1089/big.2013.1508 /C15MARY ANN LIEBERT, INC. /C15VOL. 1 NO. 1 /C15MARCH 2013 BIG DATA BD51
disillusionment as the concept diffuses into meaningless buzz.
In this article, we argue that there are good reasons why it hasbeen hard to pin down what exactly is data science. One
reason is that data science is intricately intertwined with other
important concepts, like big data and data-driven decisionmaking, which are also growing in importance and attention.Another reason is the natural tendency, in the absence ofacademic programs to teach one otherwise, to associate whata practitioner actually does with the deﬁnition of the prac-titioner’s ﬁeld; this can result in overlooking the fundamen-tals of the ﬁeld.
At the moment, trying to deﬁne the boundaries of data sci-
ence precisely is not of foremost importance. Data-scienceacademic programs are being developed, and in an academicsetting we can debate its boundaries. However, in order fordata science to serve business effectively, it is important (i) tounderstand its relationships to these other important andclosely related concepts, and (ii) to
begin to understand what are the
fundamental principles underlyingdata science. Once we embrace(ii), we can much better under-stand and explain exactly whatdata science has to offer. Further-more, only once we embrace (ii)should we be comfortable calling it data science .
In this article, we present a perspective that addresses all these
concepts. We ﬁrst work to disentangle this set of closely in-terrelated concepts. In the process, we highlight data scienceas the connective tissue between data-processing technologies(including those for ‘‘big data’’) and data-driven decisionmaking. We discuss the complicated issue of data science as aﬁeld versus data science as a profession. Finally, we offer as
examples a list of some fundamental principles underlying
data science.
Data Science
At a high level, data science is a set of fundamental principles
that support and guide the principled extraction of infor-mation and knowledge from data. Possibly the most closely
related concept to data science is data mining —the actual
extraction of knowledge from data via technologies that in-corporate these principles. There are hundreds of differentdata-mining algorithms, and a great deal of detail to themethods of the ﬁeld. We argue that underlying all these manydetails is a much smaller and more concise set of fundamentalprinciples.
These principles and techniques are applied broadly across
functional areas in business. Probably the broadest businessapplications are in marketing for tasks such as targetedmarketing, online advertising, and recommendations forcross-selling. Data science also is applied for general customerrelationship management to analyze customer behavior inorder to manage attrition and maximize expected customervalue. The ﬁnance industry uses data science for credit scoring
and trading and in operations via fraud detection and work-
force management. Major retailers from Wal-Mart to Amazonapply data science throughout their businesses, from mar-keting to supply-chain management. Many ﬁrms have differ-entiated themselves strategically with data science, sometimesto the point of evolving into data-mining companies.
But data science involves much more than just data-mining
algorithms. Successful data scientists must be able to view
business problems from a data perspective. There is a fun-damental structure to data-analytic thinking, and basicprinciples that should be understood. Data science drawsfrom many ‘‘traditional’’ ﬁelds of study. Fundamental prin-ciples of causal analysis must be understood. A large portionof what has traditionally been studied within the ﬁeld of
statistics is fundamental to data
science. Methods and methology
for visualizing data are vital. Thereare also particular areas whereintuition, creativity, commonsense, and knowledge of a partic-ular application must be broughtto bear. A data-science perspective
provides practitioners with structure and principles, which
give the data scientist a framework to systematically treat
problems of extracting useful knowledge from data.
Data Science in Action
For concreteness, let’s look at two brief case studies of ana-
lyzing data to extract predictive patterns. These studies il-
lustrate different sorts of applications of data science. Theﬁrst was reported in the New York Times :
Hurricane Frances was on its way, barreling across
the Caribbean, threatening a direct hit on Florida’sAtlantic coast. Residents made for higher ground,but far away, in Bentonville, Ark., executives at Wal-Mart Stores decided that the situation offered a greatopportunity for one of their newest data-drivenweapons.predictive technology.
A week ahead of the storm’s landfall, Linda M.
Dillman, Wal-Mart’s chief information ofﬁcer,
pressed her staff to come up with forecasts based on
what had happened when Hurricane Charley struckseveral weeks earlier. Backed by the trillions of bytes’worth of shopper history that is stored in Wal-Mart’s data warehouse, she felt that the companycould ‘‘start predicting what’s going to happen, in-stead of waiting for it to happen,’’ as she put it.
2
Consider why data-driven prediction might be useful in this
scenario. It might be useful to predict that people in the path‘‘PUBLICATIONS ARE TOUTING
DATA SCIENCE AS A HOT CAREER
CHOICE AND EVEN ‘SEXY.’’’
DATA SCIENCE AND BIG DATA
Provost and Fawcett
52BDBIG DATA MARCH 2013
of the hurricane would buy more bottled water. Maybe, but it
seems a bit obvious, and why do we need data science todiscover this? It might be useful to project the amount of
increase in sales due to the hurricane, to ensure that local
Wal-Marts are properly stocked. Perhaps mining the datacould reveal that a particular DVD sold out in the hurricane’spath—but maybe it sold out that week at Wal-Marts acrossthe country, not just where the hurricane landing was im-minent. The prediction could be somewhat useful, butprobably more general than Ms. Dillman was intending.
It would be more valuable to discover patterns due to the
hurricane that were not obvious. To do this, analysts mightexamine the huge volume of Wal-Mart data from prior,similar situations (such as Hurricane Charley earlier in thesame season) to identify unusual local demand for products.From such patterns, the company might be able to anticipateunusual demand for products andrush stock to the stores ahead of
the hurricane’s landfall.
Indeed, that is what happened.
The New York Times reported
that: ‘‘.the experts mined the
data and found that the storeswould indeed need certain prod-ucts—and not just the usual
ﬂashlights. ‘We didn’t know in the
past that strawberry Pop-Tartsincrease in sales, like seven times their normal sales rate,ahead of a hurricane,’ Ms. Dillman said in a recent interview.’And the pre-hurricane top-selling item was beer. *’’’
2
Consider a second, more typical business scenario and how it
might be treated from a data perspective. Assume you justlanded a great analytical job with MegaTelCo, one of thelargest telecommunication ﬁrms in the United States. Theyare having a major problem with customer retention in their
wireless business. In the mid-Atlantic region, 20% of cell-
phone customers leave when their contracts expire, and it isgetting increasingly difﬁcult to acquire new customers. Sincethe cell-phone market is now saturated, the huge growth inthe wireless market has tapered off. Communications com-panies are now engaged in battles to attract each other’scustomers while retaining their own. Customers switchingfrom one company to another is called churn , and it is ex-
pensive all around: one company must spend on incentives to
attract a customer while another company loses revenuewhen the customer departs.
You have been called in to help understand the problem and
to devise a solution. Attracting new customers is much moreexpensive than retaining existing ones, so a good deal ofmarketing budget is allocated to prevent churn. Marketinghas already designed a special retention offer. Your task is todevise a precise, step-by-step plan for how the data scienceteam should use MegaTelCo’s vast data resources to decide
which customers should be offered the special retention deal
prior to the expiration of their contracts. Speciﬁcally, howshould MegaTelCo decide on the set of customers to target tobest reduce churn for a particular incentive budget? An-swering this question is much more complicated than itseems initially.
Data Science and Data-Driven
Decision Making
Data science involves principles, processes, and techniques
for understanding phenomena via the (automated) analysisof data. For the perspective of this article, the ultimate goal of
data science is improving deci-sion making, as this generally is
of paramount interest to busi-
ness. Figure 1 places data sciencein the context of other closelyrelated and data-related pro-cesses in the organization. Let’sstart at the top.
Data-driven decision making
(DDD)
3refers to the practice of
basing decisions on the analysis
of data rather than purely on intuition. For example, amarketer could select advertisements based purely on herlong experience in the ﬁeld and her eye for what will work.Or, she could base her selection on the analysis of data re-garding how consumers react to different ads. She could alsouse a combination of these approaches. DDD is not an all-or-
nothing practice, and different ﬁrms engage in DDD to
greater or lesser degrees.
The beneﬁts of data-driven decision making have been dem-
onstrated conclusively. Economist Erik Brynjolfsson and hiscolleagues from MIT and Penn’s Wharton School recentlyconducted a study of how DDD affects ﬁrm performance.
3
They developed a measure of DDD that rates ﬁrms as to how
strongly they use data to make decisions across the company.
They show statistically that the more data-driven a ﬁrm is, themore productive it is—even controlling for a wide range ofpossible confounding factors. And the differences are not small:one standard deviation higher on the DDD scale is associatedwith a 4–6% increase in productivity. DDD also is correlatedwith higher return on assets, return on equity, asset utilization,and market value, and the relationship seems to be causal.
Our two example case studies illustrate two different sorts of
decisions: (1) decisions for which ‘‘discoveries’’ need to be‘‘FROM SUCH PATTERNS, THE
COMPANY MIGHT BE ABLE TO
ANTICIPATE UNUSUAL DEMAND
FOR PRODUCTS AND RUSH STOCK
TO THE STORES AHEAD OF THE
HURRICANE’S LANDFALL.’’
*Of course! What goes better with strawberry Pop-Tarts than a nice cold beer?Provost and FawcettORIGINAL ARTICLE
MARY ANN LIEBERT, INC. /C15VOL. 1 NO. 1 /C15MARCH 2013 BIG DATA BD53
made within data, and (2) decisions that repeat, especially at
massive scale, and so decision making can beneﬁt from evensmall increases in accuracy based on data analysis. The Wal-
Mart example above illustrates a type-1 problem. Linda
Dillman would like to discover knowledge that will help Wal-Mart prepare for Hurricane Frances’s imminent arrival. Ourchurn example illustrates a type-2 DDD problem. A large tele-communications company mayhave hundreds of millions ofcustomers, each a candidate for
defection. Tens of millions of
customers have contracts expir-ing each month, so each one ofthem has an increased likelihood of defection in the nearfuture. If we can improve our ability to estimate, for a givencustomer, how proﬁtable it would be for us to focus on her,we can potentially reap large beneﬁts by applying this abilityto the millions of customers in the population. This same
logic applies to many of the areas where we have seen the
most intense application of data science and data mining:direct marketing, online advertising, credit scoring, ﬁnancialtrading, help-desk management, fraud detection, searchranking, product recommendation, and so on.
The diagram in Figure 1 shows data science supporting data-
driven decision making, but also overlapping with it. This
highlights the fact that, increasingly, business decisions are
being made automatically by computer systems. Differentindustries have adopted automatic decision making at dif-ferent rates. The ﬁnance and telecommunications industrieswere early adopters. In the 1990s, automated decision making
changed the banking and consumer-credit industries dra-
matically. In the 1990s, banks and telecommunicationscompanies also implemented massive-scale systems for
managing data-driven fraud con-trol decisions. As retail systemswere increasingly computerized,merchandising decisions wereautomated. Famous examples in-
clude Harrah’s casinos’ reward
programs and the automatedrecommendations of Amazon and
Netﬂix. Currently we are seeing a revolution in advertising,due in large part to a huge increase in the amount of timeconsumers are spending online and the ability online to make(literally) split-second advertising decisions.
Data Processing and ‘‘Big Data’’
Despite the impression one might get from the media, there isa lot to data processing that is not data science. Data engi-neering and processing are critical to support data-scienceactivities, as shown in Figure 1, but they are more general andare useful for much more. Data-processing technologies areimportant for many business tasks that do not involve ex-
tracting knowledge or data-driven decision making, such as
efﬁcient transaction processing, modern web system proces-sing, online advertising campaign management, and others.
‘‘Big data’’ technologies, such as Hadoop, Hbase, CouchDB,
and others have received considerable media attention re-cently. For this article, we will simply take big data to mean
datasets that are too large for traditional data-processing
systems and that therefore require new technologies. As withthe traditional technologies, big data technologies are usedfor many tasks, including data engineering. Occasionally, bigdata technologies are actually used for implementing data-
mining techniques, but more often the well-known big datatechnologies are used for data processing in support of the
data-mining techniques and other data-science activities, as
represented in Figure 1.
Economist Prasanna Tambe of New York University’s Stern
School has examined the extent to which the utilization of bigdata technologies seems to help ﬁrms.
4He ﬁnds that, after
controlling for various possible confounding factors, the useof big data technologies correlates with signiﬁcant additionalproductivity growth. Speciﬁcally, one standard deviation higher
utilization of big data technologies is associated with 1–3%
higher productivity than the average ﬁrm; one standard devi-ation lower in terms of big data utilization is associated with1–3% lower productivity. This leads to potentially very largeproductivity differences between the ﬁrms at the extremes.
FIG. 1. Data science in the context of closely related processes
in the organization.‘‘THE BENEFITS OF DATA-DRIVEN
DECISION MAKING HAVE BEEN
DEMONSTRATED CONCLUSIVELY.’’
DATA SCIENCE AND BIG DATA
Provost and Fawcett
54BDBIG DATA MARCH 2013
From Big Data 1.0 to Big Data 2.0
One way to think about the state of big data technologies is to
draw an analogy with the business adoption of internet
technologies. In Web 1.0, businesses busied themselves with
getting the basic internet technologies in place so that theycould establish a web presence, build electronic commercecapability, and improve operating efﬁciency. We can think ofourselves as being in the era of Big Data 1.0, with ﬁrmsengaged in building capabilities to process large data. Theseprimarily support their current operations—for example, tomake themselves more efﬁcient.
With Web 1.0, once ﬁrms had
incorporated basic technologiesthoroughly (and in the process haddriven down prices) they started tolook further. They began to askwhat the web could do for them,and how it could improve upon
what they’d always done. This
ushered in the era of Web 2.0, inwhich new systems and companiesstarted to exploit the interactive nature of the web. Thechanges brought on by this shift in thinking are extensive andpervasive; the most obvious are the incorporation of social-networking components and the rise of the ‘‘voice’’ of theindividual consumer (and citizen).
Similarly, we should expect a Big Data 2.0 phase to follow Big
Data 1.0. Once ﬁrms have become capable of processingmassive data in a ﬂexible fashion, they should begin asking:What can I now do that I couldn’t do before, or do better than Icould do before? This is likely to usher in the golden era of data
science. The principles and techniques of data science will beapplied far more broadly and far more deeply than they are
today.
It is important to note that in the Web-1.0 era, some pre-
cocious companies began applying Web-2.0 ideas far aheadof the mainstream. Amazon is a prime example, incorpo-rating the consumer’s ‘‘voice’’ early on in the rating ofproducts and product reviews (and deeper, in the rating ofreviewers). Similarly, we see some companies already ap-
plying Big Data 2.0. Amazon again is a company at the
forefront, providing data-driven recommendations frommassive data. There are other examples as well. Online ad-vertisers must process extremely large volumes of data (bil-lions of ad impressions per day is not unusual) and maintaina very high throughput (real-time bidding systems makedecisions in tens of milliseconds). We should look to theseand similar industries for signs of advances in big data and
data science that subsequently will be adopted by other
industries.Data-Analytic Thinking
One of the most critical aspects of data science is the supportof data-analytic thinking. Skill at thinking data-analytically is
important not just for the data scientist but throughout the
organization. For example, managers and line employees inother functional areas will only get the best from the com-pany’s data-science resources if they have some basic un-derstanding of the fundamental principles. Managers inenterprises without substantial data-science resources shouldstill understand basic principles in order to engage consul-tants on an informed basis. Investors in data-science ventures
need to understand the funda-
mental principles in order to as-sess investment opportunitiesaccurately. More generally, busi-nesses increasingly are driven bydata analytics, and there is greatprofessional advantage in beingable to interact competently
with and within such businesses.
Understanding the fundamentalconcepts, and having frameworks
for organizing data-analytic thinking, not only will allow oneto interact competently, but will help to envision opportu-nities for improving data-driven decision making or to seedata-oriented competitive threats.
Firms in many traditional industries are exploiting new and
existing data resources for competitive advantage. They em-ploy data-science teams to bring advanced technologies tobear to increase revenue and to decrease costs. In addition,many new companies are being developed with data miningas a key strategic component. Facebook and Twitter, alongwith many other ‘‘Digital 100’’ companies,
5have high valu-
ations due primarily to data assets they are committed to
capturing or creating.{Increasingly, managers need to man-
age data-analytics teams and data-analysis projects, marketershave to organize and understand data-driven campaigns,venture capitalists must be able to invest wisely in businesseswith substantial data assets, and business strategists must beable to devise plans that exploit data.
As a few examples, if a consultant presents a proposal to
exploit a data asset to improve your business, you should be
able to assess whether the proposal makes sense. If a com-petitor announces a new data partnership, you should rec-ognize when it may put you at a strategic disadvantage. Or,let’s say you take a position with a venture ﬁrm and your ﬁrstproject is to assess the potential for investing in an advertisingcompany. The founders present a convincing argument thatthey will realize signiﬁcant value from a unique body of data
they will collect, and on that basis, are arguing for a sub-
stantially higher valuation. Is this reasonable? With an‘‘SIMILARLY, WE SHOULD
EXPECT A BIG DATA 2.0 PHASE
TO FOLLOW BIG DATA 1.0 .THIS
IS LIKELY TO USHER IN THE
GOLDEN ERA OF DATA SCIENCE.’’
{Of course, this is not a new phenomenon. Amazon and Google are well-established companies that obtain tremendous value from their data assets.Provost and FawcettORIGINAL ARTICLE
MARY ANN LIEBERT, INC. /C15VOL. 1 NO. 1 /C15MARCH 2013 BIG DATA BD55
understanding of the fundamentals of data science, you
should be able to devise a few probing questions to determinewhether their valuation arguments are plausible.
On a scale less grand, but probably more common, data-
analytics projects reach into all business units. Employeesthroughout these units must interact with the data-scienceteam. If these employees do not have a fundamentalgrounding in the principles of data-analytic thinking, theywill not really understand what is happening in the business.This lack of understanding is much more damaging in data-
science projects than in other technical projects, because the
data science supports improveddecision making. Data-scienceprojects require close interactionbetween the scientists and thebusiness people responsible for thedecision making. Firms in whichthe business people do not under-
stand what the data scientists are
doing are at a substantial disad-vantage, because they waste timeand effort or, worse, because theyultimately make wrong decisions.A recent article in Harvard Busi-ness Review concludes: ‘‘For all the breathless promises aboutthe return on investment in Big Data, however, companies
face a challenge. Investments in analytics can be useless, even
harmful, unless employees can incorporate that data intocomplex decision making.’’
6
Some Fundamental Concepts
of Data Science
There is a set of well-studied, fundamental concepts under-
lying the principled extraction of knowledge from data, with
both theoretical and empirical backing. These fundamental
concepts of data science are drawn from many ﬁelds thatstudy data analytics. Some reﬂect the relationship betweendata science and the business problems to be solved. Somereﬂect the sorts of knowledge discoveries that can be madeand are the basis for technical solutions. Others are cau-tionary and prescriptive. We brieﬂy discuss a few here. Thislist is not intended to be exhaustive; detailed discussions even
of the handful below would ﬁll a book.* The important thing
is that we understand these fundamental concepts.
Fundamental concept: Extracting useful knowledge from data
to solve business problems can be treated systematically by fol-lowing a process with reasonably well-deﬁned stages. The Cross-
Industry Standard Process for Data Mining
7(CRISP-DM) is
one codiﬁcation of this process. Keeping such a process in
mind can structure our thinking about data analytics prob-lems. For example, in actual practice one repeatedly sees an-
alytical ‘‘solutions’’ that are not based on careful analysis ofthe problem or are not carefully evaluated. Structured think-
ing about analytics emphasizes these often underappreciated
aspects of supporting decision making with data. Suchstructured thinking also contrasts critical points at whichhuman intuition and creativity is necessary versus points atwhich high-powered analytical tools can be brought to bear.
Fundamental concept: Evaluating data-science results requires
careful consideration of the context in which they will be used.
Whether knowledge extracted from data will aid in decision
making depends critically on theapplication in question. For ourchurn-management example, howexactly are we going to use thepatterns that are extracted fromhistorical data? More generally,does the pattern lead to better de-
cisions than some reasonable alter-
native? How well would one havedone by chance? How well wouldone do with a smart ‘‘default’’ al-ternative? Many data science eva-luation frameworks are based on
this fundamental concept.
Fundamental concept: The relationship between the business
problem and the analytics solution often can be decomposed intotractable subproblems via the framework of analyzing expectedvalue. Various tools for mining data exist, but business
problems rarely come neatly prepared for their application.
Breaking the business problem up into components corre-
sponding to estimating probabilities and computing or esti-mating values, along with a structure for recombining thecomponents, is broadly useful. We have many speciﬁc toolsfor estimating probabilities and values from data. For ourchurn example, should the value of the customer be taken
into account in addition to the likelihood of leaving? It isdifﬁcult to realistically assess any customer-targeting solution
without phrasing the problem as one of expected value.
Fundamental concept: Information technology can be used to
ﬁnd informative data items from within a large body of data.One of the ﬁrst data-science concepts encountered in busi-
ness-analytics scenarios is the notion of ﬁnding correlations.
‘‘Correlation’’ often is used loosely to mean data items thatprovide information about other data items—speciﬁcally,known quantities that reduce our uncertainty about un-known quantities. In our churn example, a quantity of in-terest is the likelihood that a particular customer will leaveafter her contract expires. Before the contract expires, thiswould be an unknown quantity. However, there may be
known data items (usage, service history, how many friends‘‘FACEBOOK AND TWITTER,
ALONG WITH MANY OTHER
‘DIGITAL 100’ COMPANIES, HAVE
HIGH VALUATIONS DUE
PRIMARILY TO DATA ASSETS
THEY ARE COMMITTED TO
CAPTURING OR CREATING.’’
*And they do; see http://data-science-for-biz.com.
DATA SCIENCE AND BIG DATA
Provost and Fawcett
56BDBIG DATA MARCH 2013
have canceled contracts) that correlate with our quantity of
interest. This fundamental concept underlies a vast numberof techniques for statistical analysis, predictive modeling, and
other data mining.
Fundamental concept: Entities that are similar with respect to
known features or attributes often are similar with respect tounknown features or attributes. Computing similarity is one of
the main tools of data science. There are many ways to
compute similarity and more are invented each year.
Fundamental concept: If you look
too hard at a set of data, you willﬁnd something—but it might not
generalize beyond the data you’re
observing. This is referred to as
‘‘overﬁtting’’ a dataset. Techniquesfor mining data can be very pow-erful, and the need to detect andavoid overﬁtting is one of the most important concepts tograsp when applying data-mining tools to real problems. Theconcept of overﬁtting and its avoidance permeates data sci-
ence processes, algorithms, and evaluation methods.
Fundamental concept: To draw causal conclusions, one must
pay very close attention to the presence of confounding factors,possibly unseen ones. Often, it is not enough simply to un-
cover correlations in data; we may want to use our models toguide decisions on how to inﬂuence the behavior producingthe data. For our churn problem, we want to intervene andcause customer retention. All methods for drawing causal
conclusions—from interpreting the coefﬁcients of regression
models to randomized controlled experiments—incorporateassumptions regarding the presence or absence of con-founding factors. In applying such methods, it is importantto understand their assumptions clearly in order to under-stand the scope of any causal claims.
Chemistry Is Not About Test Tubes: Data
Science vs. the Work of the Data Scientist
Two additional, related complications combine to make it
more difﬁcult to reach a common understanding of just
what is data science and how it ﬁts with other related
concepts.
First is the dearth of academic programs focusing on data
science. Without academic programs deﬁning the ﬁeld forus, we need to deﬁne the ﬁeld for ourselves. However, each
of us sees the ﬁeld from a differe nt perspective and thereby
forms a different conception. The dearth of academic pro-grams is largely due to the inertia associated with academiaand the concomitant effort involved in creating new aca-demic programs—especially ones that span traditional dis-ciplines. Universities clearly see the need for such programs,and it is only a matter of time before this ﬁrst complicationwill be resolved. For example, in New York City alone, two
top universities are creating degree programs in data sci-
ence. Columbia University is in the process of creating amaster’s degree program within its new Institute for DataSciences and Engineering (and has founded a center focus-ing on the foundations of data science), and NYU willcommence a master’s degree program in data science infall 2013.
The second complication builds
on confusion caused by the ﬁrst.Workers tend to associate with
their ﬁeld the tasks they spend
considerable time on or thosethey ﬁnd challenging or reward-ing. This is in contrast to the tasksthat differentiate the ﬁeld from
other ﬁelds. Forsythe described this phenomenon in anethnographic study of practitioners in artiﬁcial intelligence(AI):
The AI specialists I describe view their professional
work as science (and in some cases engineer-
ing).The scientists’ work and the approach they
take to it make sense in relation to a particular viewof the world that is taken for granted in thelaboratory .Wondering what it means to ‘‘do AI,’’
I have asked many practitioners to describe their ownwork. Their answers invariably focus on one or moreof the following: problem solving, writing code, andbuilding systems.
8
Forsythe goes on to explain that the AI practitioners focus on
these three activities even when it is clear that they spend
much time doing other things (even less related speciﬁcally toAI). Importantly, none of these three tasks differentiates AI
from other scientiﬁc and engineering ﬁelds. Clearly just beingvery good at these three things does not an AI scientist make.And as Forsythe points out, technically the latter two are noteven necessary, as the lab director, a famous AI Scientist, hadnot written code or built systems for years. Nonetheless, these
are the tasks the AI scientists saw as deﬁning their work—
they apparently did not explicitly consider the notion of whatmakes doing AI different from doing other tasks that involveproblem solving, writing code, and system building. (This ispossibly due to the fact that in AI, there were academic dis-tinctions to call on.)
Taken together, these two complications cause particular
confusion in data science, because there are few academic
distinctions to fall back on, and moreover, due to the state ofthe art in data processing, data scientists tend to spend amajority of their problem-solving time on data preparationand processing. The goal of such preparation is either to‘‘WITHOUT ACADEMIC
PROGRAMS DEFINING THE FIELD
FOR US, WE NEED TO DEFINE
THE FIELD FOR OURSELVES.’’Provost and FawcettORIGINAL ARTICLE
MARY ANN LIEBERT, INC. /C15VOL. 1 NO. 1 /C15MARCH 2013 BIG DATA BD57
subsequently apply data-science methods or to understand
the results. However, that does not change the fact that theday-to-day work of a data scientist—especially an entry-level
one—may be largely data processing. This is directly analo-
gous to an entry-level chemist spending the majority of hertime doing technical lab work. If this were all she were trainedto do, she likely would not be rightly called a chemist butrather a lab technician. Important for being a chemist is thatthis work is in support of the application of the science ofchemistry, and hopefully the eventual advancement to jobsinvolving more chemistry and less technical work. Similarly
for data science: a chief scientist in a data-science-oriented
company will do much less data processing and more data-analytics design and interpretation.
At the time of this writing, discussions of data science inev-
itably mention not just the analytical skills but the popular
tools used in such analysis. For example, it is common to see
job advertisements mentioning data-mining techniques(random forests, support vector machines), speciﬁc applica-tion areas (recommendation systems, ad placement optimi-zation), alongside popular software tools for processing bigdata (SQL, Hadoop, MongoDB). This is natural. The partic-ular concerns of data science in business are fairly new, andbusinesses are still working to ﬁgure out how best to address
them. Continuing our analogy, the state of data science may
be likened to that of chemistry in the mid-19th century, whentheories and general principles were being formulated and theﬁeld was largely experimental. Every good chemist had to be acompetent lab technician. Similarly, it is hard to imagine aworking data scientist who is not proﬁcient with certain sortsof software tools. A ﬁrm may be well served by requiring thattheir data scientists have skills to access, prepare, and process
data using tools the ﬁrm has adopted.
Nevertheless, we emphasize that there is an important reason
to focus here on the general principles of data science. In tenyears’ time, the predominant technologies will likely have
changed or advanced enough that today’s choices would seem
quaint. On the other hand, the general principles of datascience are not so differerent than they were 20 years ago andlikely will change little over the coming decades.
Conclusion
Underlying the extensive collection of techniques for miningdata is a much smaller set of fundamental concepts com-prising data science . In order for data science to ﬂourish as a
ﬁeld, rather than to drown in the ﬂood of popular attention,we must think beyond the algorithms, techniques, and tools
in common use. We must think about the core principles and
concepts that underlie the techniques, and also the systematicthinking that fosters success in data-driven decision making.These data science concepts are general and very broadlyapplicable.
Success in today’s data-oriented business environment re-
quires being able to think about how these fundamental
concepts apply to particular business problems—to think
data-analytically. This is aided by conceptual frameworks thatthemselves are part of data science. For example, the auto-mated extraction of patterns from data is a process with well-deﬁned stages. Understanding this process and its stages helpsstructure problem solving, makes it more systematic, andthus less prone to error.
There is strong evidence that business performance can be
improved substantially via data-driven decision making,
3big
data technologies,4and data-science techniques based on big
data.9,10Data science supports data-driven decision mak-
ing—and sometimes allows making decisions automaticallyat massive scale—and depends upon technologies for ‘‘bigdata’’ storage and engineering. However, the principles ofdata science are its own and should be considered and dis-
cussed explicitly in order for data science to realize its
potential.
Author Disclosure Statement
F.P. and T.F. are authors of the forthcoming book, Data
Science for Business .
References
1. Davenport T.H., and Patil D.J. Data scientist: the sexiest
job of the 21st century. Harv Bus Rev, Oct 2012.
2. Hays C. L. What they know about you. N Y Times, Nov.
14, 2004.
3. Brynjolfsson E., Hitt L.M., and Kim H.H. Strength in
numbers: How does data-driven decision making affect
ﬁrm performance? Working paper, 2011. SSRN workingpaper. Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract =
1819486.
4. Tambe P. Big data know-how and business value.
Working paper, NYU Stern School of Business, NY,New York, 2012.
5. Fusfeld A. The digital 100: the world’s most valuable
startups. Bus Insider. Sep. 23, 2010.
6. Shah S., Horne A., and Capella ´J. Good data won’t
guarantee good decisions. Harv Bus Rev, Apr 2012.
7. Wirth, R., and Hipp, J. CRISP-DM: Towards a stan-
dard process model for data mining. In Proceedings ofthe 4th International Conference on the Practical Ap-plications of Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining,2000, pp. 29–39.
DATA SCIENCE AND BIG DATA
Provost and Fawcett
58BDBIG DATA MARCH 2013
8. Forsythe, Diana E. The construction of work in artiﬁcial
intelligence. Science, Technology & Human Values,18(4), 1993, pp. 460–479.
9. Hill, S., Provost, F., and Volinsky, C. Network-based
marketing: Identifying likely adopters via consumernetworks. Statistical Science, 21(2), 2006, pp. 256–276.
10. Martens D. and Provost F. Pseudo-social network tar-
geting from consumer transaction data. Working paper,CEDER-11-05, Stern School of Business, 2011. Availableat SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract =1934670.Address correspondence to:
F. Provost
Department of Information, Operations,and Management SciencesLeonard N. Stern School of BusinessNew York University
44 W. 4th Street, 8
thFloor
New York, NY 10012
E-mail: fprovost@stern.nyu.eduProvost and FawcettORIGINAL ARTICLE
MARY ANN LIEBERT, INC. /C15VOL. 1 NO. 1 /C15MARCH 2013 BIG DATA BD59
